When Advertising Age magazine released its picks for the best 100 ad
campaigns of the 20th century, it was no surprise that the world of beer
advertising was well represented. After all, few can forget Bubba Smith and
Dick Butkus arguing that eternal debate, "Tastes Great--Less Filling."
Likewise, many a beer drinker can still whistle that infectious jingle,
"Hey Mabel--Black Label," though the popular television commercials have not
aired for 30 years. So, what made these and other classic beer commercials
great?

Surely, from the beer maker's standpoint, a commercial's success can
ultimately be judged by only one criterion: its impact on beer sales. But,
we, the oft-jaded viewers, take a more visceral approach. More and more, we
tend to grade commercials on their ability to, if only in passing, penetrate
our popular culture. At their best, we induct them into our collective
psyche, muse over them with friends and coworkers, and even add their lingo
to our vocabulary (can you say "Whassup?").

Beer makers have been searching for the perfect beer commercial nearly since
television exploded onto the American scene in the late 1940s. In those
pioneer days, nobody--not the advertisers, not the ad agencies, not the TV
stations--knew exactly what made for a good commercial. Indeed, the earliest
beer commercials consisted of everything from live demonstrations of how to
cook a Welsh rarebit using beer to the noisy rumble of a studio audience
muddling through a rendition of the brewer's theme song.

With National Prohibition still fresh in memory, brewers were initially wary
of peddling their beers on the air. Early critics of television saw the new
medium as little more than an intrusion into peoples' living rooms, and many
were concerned that beer ads might offend the viewers' sensibilities.
Commercials that actually showed a person consuming beer, for example, were
often deemed in bad taste. Beer ads were typically aired only in the late
evenings, and Sundays were entirely off limits. Surveys were periodically
conducted among viewers to determine whether any "moral backlash" might be
caused by selling beer on television.

But early apprehension was soon overtaken by the realization that television
offered beer makers something tremendously valuable and unique: the ability
to target the beer drinker right at the barstool. The American tavern, after
all, was the first home of television. In Chicago, for example, taverns
accounted for half of all sales of television sets in 1947. Had any tavern
keeper initially doubted the revolutionary importance of TV to his trade, he
was surely converted after the 1947 World Series. Telecasts of the seven
games between the Dodgers and the Yankees made for standing-room-only crowds
in taverns throughout New York City.

Indeed, in the early days, as TV stations were starved for quality programs,
television was necessarily dominated by sporting events. This, of course,
added significantly to TV's allure among beer advertisers. The notion that
"sports sells beer" is perhaps the most sacred axiom of beer marketing, just
as true 50 years ago as today.
